UFV ASC Summarizing a Scholarly Journal Article  
 
Available online at: https://ufv.ca/asc/student -resources/  
 
Students are often required to summarize scholarly journal articles or to base reviews or 
critiques or research papers on scholarly sources, all of which require acts of summary. 
Summary is one of the most prominent features of academic writing because it gives writers 
access to the ideas of others. You will find that most of the academic writing you do will 
respond to or be based on the ideas – the writing – of others.  
The guide that follows will introduce you to scholarly summary and describe it as a process.  
 
Scholarly Journal Articles, Research Situations, and Knowledge  
Scholarly journals publish research by professional researchers who often study and teach in 
universities or other research institutions. Before scholarly articles are published, they are 
reviewed by researchers who share the research concerns of your article’s author. This means 
that before an article can be published in a scholarly journal it has to be considered worthy of 
publication because it meets the scholarly goal of generating new knowledge about a specific 
topic. To be published, the article must have taken into account most of what is already 
known about a topic. So current research articles are useful because they incorporate 
(sometimes explicitly) what is understood about a research question.  
 
Summary  Reports ; Summary Does not Evaluate  
The goal of your summary, then, is to report in a brief and yet accurate manner the main gists  
(“gist” refers to the main or essential parts of the article, its main line or lines of reasoning) of 
the article. The goal of summary is not to offer an evaluation or opinion of the original 
article, but, rather, to report the writer’s main ideas and findings. This means that you will 
need to indicate  to your reader the writer’s main point or points or purpose for writing. You 
will also need to point out how the writer develops or supports his or her main point.  
 
Since one of the goals of summary is to present a far more concise version than the original, it 
is not usual to include direct quotes from the original or even to include very many specific, 
concrete details from the original, though you may need to include one or two brief examples 
that illustrate the writer’s main point or points. Think of a summary as the child of the 
original document: fully formed and able to make sense and stand on its own, a new text, not 
exactly the same as its original, but bearing the features of its parental origins, so much so 
that anyone who sees the summary might be heard to remark, “Oh, you have your parents’ 
main features; you even sound like your parents, but you are much shorter!”  
 
  
 CONTACT:  asc@ufv.ca  www.ufv.ca/asc   
604-854-4573 or (Chilliwack CEP) 604 -504-7441 ext. 2432  Summarizing a  
Scholarly Journal Article  UFV ASC Summarizing a Scholarly Journal Article  
 How to Produce a Small Child from an Unwieldy Parent, or  
the Process of Summarizing a Scholarly Journal Article  
 
To begin, flip through  the entire article, noting any headings the author may have used 
to indicate main sections or topic shifts in the article. These headings reflect the writer’s 
organization or structure in the article. Pay special attention to the title of the article; it 
should indicate the writer’s topic and approach to that topic. If you can get a sense of how 
the writer has structured the information in her article, you are well on your way to 
summarizing it.  
 
Read the abstract  at the beginning of the article if there is one. The abstract is an even 
more concise summary of the article than the summary you will do.  
 
Read the article  through once to capture the gists of the article, its main ideas. You are 
reading here to get a sense of the writer’s topic and the important relationships or 
connections between the parts of the article. Understanding these connections is necessary 
to write a coherent summary.  
 
Read the article again  in a far more active way: this involves note taking (by making 
notes in the margins of the paper to capture essential ideas) and sorting more abstract, 
general information or ideas from detailed, concrete information (by highlighting these 
different kinds of information with differently -coloured highlighter pens).  
You have five goals in this note -taking process:  
 to make note of the writer’s main ideas which will usually be general and abstract  
 to make note of the more detailed description of examples or cases that help the 
writer to interpret or analyze the more general, abstract ideas she is attempting to 
work with  
 to notice the distinction between abstract and detailed information (by 
highlighting each in different colours!)  
 to capture the connections between important ideas  
5. to make note of important ideas in shorthand form: don’t copy the writer’s words 
into the margin, but retain key words, translating the writer’s complex ideas into 
nuggets of information  
As you take notes, keep in mind that you are actively sorting  through the text for 
important ideas that will need to appear in the summary to accurately represent the 
writer’s ideas, leaving behind  information that is too detailed, that if retained would 
extend the summary, making it far too long.  
Summary cannot capture all of the abstract ideas within an article and the detailed 
supporting material which the writer includes to help the reader to interpret those abstract 
concepts or ideas. Neither can summary report all of the technical terminology of the 
original, though it should retain some of the key terminology. After all, your summary has  
CONTACT:  asc@ufv.ca  www.ufv.ca/asc   
604-854-4573 or (Chilliwack CEP) 604 -504-7441 ext. 2432  UFV ASC Summarizing a Scholarly Journal Article  
 to resemble its source.  
This suggests that summary involves acts of sorting  (general, abstract concepts from  
detailed examples or cases), acts of connecting  important ideas, and acts of translation  
(rephrasing complex ideas into more concise, portable forms), which can make a long, 
complicated document accessible for use.  
Remember that the goal of summary is to produce a handsome, fully formed, coherent text 
that bears an accurate relationship to its original, presenting it in a much briefer form.  
 
Look for connections  between the nuggets of information that emerged from the note -
taking process and write a first draft  of your summary.  
As you write the first draft of your summary, you will likely notice that the writer has 
located important ideas and the connections between them at various places in the article. 
Because of this, you may not be able to summarize the article in the same linear pattern of 
the original. You may notice for example, that the most important point the writer makes is 
located in her final paragraph. This would then need to come forward in your summary; 
your reader would look for it near the beginning. You may also notice that between main 
ideas, and between material that connects one main idea to another, may be located several 
paragraphs of detailed description. Your summary does not need to capture all of the 
detailed description, but it should capture the connection between ideas, suggesting that you 
shouldn’t expect to retain a key idea from every paragraph of the original article. 
Remember, too, that retaining some detailed examples or descriptions from the original may 
help your reader make a strong connection to the original article. Be cautious, though, in the 
amount of detail you bring into your summary. Too much will bog down your summary and 
obscure the writer’s main ideas that you are attempting to report.  
 
Read the draft of your summary to someone who has not read the original article. Ask 
him or her to let you know if it makes sense. Above all, your summary needs to be a 
coherent document that both makes sense on its own and accurately reflects its 
original source.  
 
Express your summary  in a scholarly style.  This involves introducing your source in a 
scholarly way, describing what kind of writing your source is and its main finding, and 
keeping in touch with your source throughout your summary.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See annotated example on next page...  
CONTACT:  asc@ufv.ca  www.ufv.ca/asc   
604-854-4573 or (Chilliwack CEP) 604 -504-7441 ext. 2432  UFV ASC Summarizing a Scholarly Journal Article  
 Here is an example of a summary that displays a scholarly style : 
 
Susan McDonald’s Professional 
Academic Writing in the Humanities 
and Social Sciences (1994) is a cross -
disciplinary study which articulates 
epistemological differences in 
disciplinary practice as they manifest 
through recurrent rhetorical practices. 
To help clarify differences in 
knowledge -making practices, she 
identifies four patterns of variation in 
epistemological practice within 
disciplines that range from scientific to 
humanistic.  
 
 
 
The Academic Success Centre has online and tutoring resources available to help you 
with writing in a variety of disciplines, understanding and producing MLA, APA, and 
Chicago styles of citing sources, and documenting your academic work. Check our 
website for links and more information.  
CONTACT:  asc@ufv.ca  www.ufv.ca/asc   
604-854-4573 or (Chilliwack CEP) 604 -504-7441 ext. 2432  scholarly writers keep in 
touch with their source, 
“she,” i.e., MacDonald, 
and use reporting lan-
guage, e.g., “identifies”   scholarly 
writers 
name the 
kind of writ-
ing they are 
summarizing  scholarly writers name 
the texts they summa-
rize and the dates those 
texts were published  scholarly 
writers 
name their 
sources  
scholarly writers de-
scribe their source’s 
main finding or conclu-
sion  